>> Did ancient Peruvian leaders
use hallucinogens to keep
their followers in line?
And does this
elongated skull show
evidence of an advanced surgical
implant, or is it just a hoax?
This is a "Gaia News Breakdown."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Archaeologists studying
the Wari people
in the southern Peruvian
town of Quilcapampa
have found hallucinogenic
vilca seeds in a recent dig.
Writing in the
journal "Antiquity,"
the researchers
point out they found
16 vilca seeds in an
ancient alcoholic drink
called chicha de molle
in an area believed
to be used for feasting.
The Wari people lived in this
area from about 500 to 1,000
AD.
Their reverence for the
psychotropic vilca seed
has been found in images
at other Wari sites.
This is the first find
of the actual seeds.
What is particularly interesting
to the archaeologists
is the role of
ancient hallucinogens
and their influence on
social interactions.
First, the vilca
seeds would have
come from tropical woodlands on
the eastern side of the Andes.
A complex trade network
would have to be in place
to even get them.
And adding the vilca seeds
with the alcoholic drink
would increase the intensity
of a psychedelic trip.
That trip would have
been seen as a journey
to the spirit world, and
Wari leadership's control
over the substance
led to control over
their followers who wanted it.
Researchers argue
in their paper,
"The vilca-infused brew
brought people together
in a shared psychotropic
experience, while ensuring
the privileged position
of Wari leaders
within the social
hierarchy as the providers
of the hallucinogen."
Work continues at the
dig site at Quilcapampa,
and researchers plan to
test where the ancient vilca
seeds came from so
they can figure out
the rest of the
ancient trade routes.
This Peruvian elongated skull
may show the earliest evidence
of ancient metal implant.
LiveScience.com reports
that the skull, which
was donated to the Museum of
Osteology in Oklahoma City,
is elongated and pointed.
That is not
necessarily noteworthy,
as ancient Peruvians
used to squeeze and shape
the heads of infants.
But this implant,
if it is genuine,
could show advanced surgery
using a foreign object.
Beneath the metal,
there is a hole
in the skull
believed to have been
made by surgical
trepanation, which
is surgical removal of part of
the skull to treat an injury.
Trepanation in the
Andes was widely
practiced until the
early 16th century.
This skull appears to
show a piece of metal that
was hammered and molded into
shape to fill and protect
the trepanation hole.
And it appears the man
survived, as there's
evidence of bones healing
and growing back together.
But is it real?
The Museum of
Osteology has not yet
determined if the
metal is genuine
or if it was added later.
As John Verano, anthropology
professor at Tulane University,
told LiveScience,
"I think this is
something fabricated to
make the skull a more
valuable collectible."
Verano has studied a
number of Andean skulls
with metal plates that
turned out to be fake.
If this metal
plate is a forgery,
it could have been
added years ago.
More testing must be
done, but the museum
has not yet announced when
those tests will take place.
If the metal turns
out to be genuine,
this would be the
first of its kind.
For a new perspective, this
is a "Gaia News Breakdown."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]